DataForm: document decision criteria when to use it or not (#74770)
WordPress/gutenberg: packages/dataviews/src/dataform/stories/when-to-use.story.mdx

Here is a decision tree to help identify which approach is the right choice.

## 1. Ask first: are you editing a data object?

Is this form editing an existing data object (like a post, media item, user, or settings object) that gets updated incrementally?

-   If **no** → see [Path A: Action/flow forms](#path-a-actionflow-forms)
-   If **yes** → see [Path B: Editing data objects](#path-b-editing-data-objects)

---

## Path A: Action/flow forms

Use this path when your form represents an action or flow (login, search, contact, submit) rather than editing a data object.

### Do you need validation?

Does your form need validation (required fields, format validation, custom validation rules)?

-   If **yes** → use the `validated` family of components from `@wordpress/components` (like `ValidatedInputControl`, `ValidatedTextControl`, `ValidatedSelectControl`, etc.). These components extend WordPress components with HTML5 Constraint Validation API support.

> -   If **no** → use components from `@wordpress/ui` (like `Field`, `Input`, `Button`, etc.). These provide a clean, accessible form structure without validation overhead.

Reviewer: Let's remove this, the package is not ready for this kind of use yet.

Author: At this moment, is the right answer to use `InputControl`, `TextControl`, the versions without the `Validated` prefix? For the "don't need validation" scenario?

Reviewer: Right, something like this:

```suggestion
-   If **no** → use components from `@wordpress/components` (like `InputControl`, `SelectControl`, etc.). These provide a clean, accessible form structure without validation overhead.
```

I've [attempted](https://github.com/WordPress/gutenberg/pull/74815/changes#diff-544b4188d93176bf9318fb5b18c696e60f5c3e8a07b06bf0a2cf5d6a3a42addc) to make it clearer to not use `@wordpress/ui` yet.

-   **Layout**: Simple horizontal or vertical
-   **Validation**: Not required (search can accept any input)
-   **Decision**: Use components from `@wordpress/ui` (like `Field`, `Input`, `Button`)

### Post editor

-   **Path**: Path B (editing data object)
-   **Complexity**: Complex (many fields)
-   **Layout**: Panels, grouped fields
-   **Validation**: Advanced (async, cross-field)
-   **Decision**: Use `DataForm`

### Media editing

-   **Path**: Path B (editing data object)
-   **Complexity**: Complex (metadata, alt text, etc.)
-   **Layout**: Panels or cards
-   **Validation**: Advanced
-   **Decision**: Use `DataForm`

### Simple settings page

-   **Path**: Path B (editing data object)
-   **Complexity**: Simple (few fields)
-   **Layout**: Simple vertical
-   **Validation**: Basic
-   **Decision**: Use `DataForm` (since it's editing a data object, even if simple)

### Complex settings page

-   **Path**: Path B (editing data object)
-   **Complexity**: Complex (many fields, grouped)
-   **Layout**: Panels or cards
-   **Validation**: Advanced (dependencies, async)
-   **Decision**: Use `DataForm`

---

## When in doubt…

**Quick reference:**

> -   **No data object + No validation** → `@wordpress/ui` components (`Field`, `Input`, `Button`)

Reviewer: Remove too

-   **Side-by-side labels** – Labels positioned next to fields rather than above
-   **Simple vertical layout** – Standard stacked fields

### Validation capabilities

`DataForm` supports:

-   **Basic validation** – HTML5 validation attributes and simple client-side checks
-   **Advanced validation** – Async validation, cross-field validation, custom rules, field dependencies, and real-time validation feedback

---

## Examples

### Login form

-   **Path**: Path A (action/flow)
-   **Complexity**: Simple (2-3 fields)
-   **Layout**: Simple vertical
-   **Validation**: Required (username/email and password validation)
-   **Decision**: Use `validated` family of components from `@wordpress/components`

Don't use `DataForm` when the goal is to authenticate a user (collect credentials and submit once). Instead, use more primitive components like `InputControl` and `RadioControl`.

### Search form

-   **Path**: Path A (action/flow)
-   **Complexity**: Simple (1-2 fields)
-   **Layout**: Simple horizontal or vertical
-   **Validation**: Not required (search can accept any input)
-   **Decision**: Use components from `@wordpress/ui` (like `Field`, `Input`, `Button`)

> Let users define search criteria to find items in a dataset, from simple keyword search to advanced filters (status, author, date ranges, taxonomy, etc.). Instead, use `SearchControl` and other components related to the search features, along with the data the search is searching.

Reviewer 2: I would move these two sections into a new one above the "When in doubt…" that says "Do not use in…".

> Let users define search criteria to find items in a dataset, from simple keyword search to advanced filters (status, author, date ranges, taxonomy, etc.). Instead, use `SearchControl` and other components related to the search features, along with the data the search is searching.

Reviewer 2: I would replace the "Let users define search criteria…" with "Don't use `DataForm` when the goal is…"
